# FILL IN AS MUCH INFORMATION AS YOU CAN.  HINTS HAVE BEEN PUT IN SOME FIELDS AFTER THE HASH # SYMBOL. REPLACE THE HINT WITH TEXT WHERE APPROPRIATE.									# STUDY DESCRIPTION SECTION					# Section with generic information about the study including title, description, publication details (if applicable) and contact details										
Comment[IDR Study Accession]	idr0107
			Study Title	Diffusion-mediated HEI10 coarsening can explain meiotic crossover positioning in Arabidopsis	
			Study Type	protein localisation 	
			Study Type Term Source REF	EFO	
			Study Type Term Accession	GO_0008104
			Study Description	In most organisms, the number and distribution of crossovers that occur during meiosis are tightly controlled. All chromosomes must receive at least one “obligatory crossover” and crossovers are prevented from occurring near one another by “crossover interference”. However, the mechanistic basis of this phenomenon of crossover interference has remained mostly mysterious. Using quantitative super-resolution cytogenetics and mathematical modelling, we investigated crossover positioning in the Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type, an over-expressor of the conserved E3 ligase HEI10, and a hei10 heterozygous line5. We show that crossover positions can be explained by a predictive, diffusion-mediated coarsening model, in which large, approximately evenly-spaced HEI10 foci grow at the expense of smaller, closely-spaced clusters. We propose this coarsening process explains many aspects of Arabidopsis crossover positioning, including crossover interference. Consistent with this model, we also demonstrate that crossover positioning can be predictably modified in vivo simply by altering HEI10 dosage, with higher and lower dosage leading to weaker and stronger crossover interference, respectively. As HEI10 is a conserved member of the RING finger protein family that functions in the interference-sensitive pathway for crossover formation, we anticipate that similar mechanisms may regulate crossover positioning in diverse eukaryotes.				Study Key Words	Meiosis	Crossover Interference	Recombination	HEI10	Arabidopsis				Study Organism	Arabidopsis thaliana
				Study Organism Term Source REF	NCBITaxon	
			Study Organism Term Accession	3702	
			Study Experiments Number	1	
			Study External URL		

Study BioImage Archive Accession
			Study Public Release Date	2021-06-30	
									# Study Publication	
				Study PubMed ID	
				Study Publication Title	Diffusion-mediated HEI10 coarsening explains meiotic crossover positioning in Arabidopsis
				Study Author List	Morgan C, Fozard JA, Hartley M, Henderson IR, Bomblies K, Howard M
				Study PMC ID		
			Study DOI									
	# Study Contacts	
				Study Person Last Name	Morgan	
			Study Person First Name	Chris		
		Study Person Email	Chris.Morgan@JIC.ac.uk	
			Study Person Address	John Innes Centre, Norwich, UK, NR4 7UH		
		Study Person ORCID	0000-0002-7475-2155	
			Study Person Roles	submitter	
								# Study License and Data DOI	
				Study License	CC BY 4.0
				Study License URL	https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/				Study Copyright	Morgan et al	
			Study Data Publisher	University of Dundee	
			Study Data DOI									Term Source Name	NCBITaxon	EFO	CMPO	FBbi	Term Source URI	http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/cmpo/	http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/											# EXPERIMENT SECTION					# Experiment Section containing all information relative to each experiment in the study including materials used, protocols names and description, phenotype names and description. For multiple experiments this section should be repeated.  Copy and paste the whole section below and fill out for the next experiment										Experiment Number	1	
			Comment[IDR Experiment Name]	idr0107-morgan-hei10/experimentA	

Experiment Sample Type	cell
			Experiment Description	Images used for HEI10 focus patterning and intensity measurements in Morgan et al., 2021. These are multichannel 3D-SIM reconstructed images of Arabidopsis pachytene cells labelled for ZYP1 and HEI10 and stained with DAPI. 3D skeleton traces of each of the 5 bivalent paths for each cell are also included to facilitate downstream image analysis. 
				Experiment Size	5D Images: 	Average Image Dimension (XYZCT):	Total Tb: 	

Experiment Example Images	WT_5.12.19_plant11_slide1_image3/Composite				Experiment Imaging Method	structured illumination microscopy (SIM)				Experiment Imaging Method Term Source REF	FBbi		
		Experiment Imaging Method Term Accession	FBbi_00000332		
		Experiment Comments	Each image folder contains one multichannel z-stack 3D-SIM image file ('composite') and 5 traved bivalent skeleton paths. For some images that contain multiple cells, additional skeleton trace path files are present. 									# assay files			
		Experiment Assay File	idr0107-experimentA-annotation	
			Experiment Assay File Format	tab-delimited text	
			Assay Experimental Conditions	Images were obtained from either wild-type (WT), HEI10 overexpressor (HEI10OXC2) or hei10 heterozygous mutant (hei10+-) lines of the Arabidopsis Col-0 accession. 
				Assay Experimental Conditions Term Source REF	
			Assay Experimental Conditions Term Accession	
				Quality Control Description	During data analysis, bivalent 3D skeleton path voxels were ordered to give a defined start and finish orientation (see step 1 of data analysis protocol). Occasionally, this step led to some paths being prematurely truncated. Truncated paths were identified by visual inspection and removed from downstream data analysis steps. These paths are noted in the  'Good trace? (y/n)' column of the processed data IDR file.  
								# Protocols	
				Protocol Name	growth protocol	treatment protocol	image acquisition and feature extraction protocol	data analysis protocol	
Protocol Type	growth protocol	treatment protocol	image acquisition and feature extraction protocol	data analysis protocol	
Protocol Type Term Source REF	EFO	EFO	
		Protocol Type Term Accession	EFO_0003789	EFO_0003969	
		Protocol Description	Arabidopsis thaliana lines used in this study were wild-type Col-0, the HEI10 overexpressor-line C2 and heterozygotes of the hei10-2 T-DNA insertion line (Salk_014624). Plants were grown in controlled environment rooms with 16 h of light (125 mMol cool white) at 20 °C and 8 h of darkness at 16 °C.	Immunostained spreads of Arabidopsis pachytene cells were prepared for 3D-SIM imaging as follows.To roughly stage the meiocytes, a single anther from a floral bud was removed and squashed in a drop of water on a clean slide under a coverslip and inspected using brightfield microscopy. Early- and mid-pachytene meiocytes were still stuck together within a meiocyte column, whilst late—pachytene meiocytes had begun to break apart from one-another. More precise staging of early and late pachytene meiocytes was also based on previously defined HEI10 behaviour, with mid pachytene meiocytes exhibiting an intermediate phenotype.  The remaining 5 anthers containing meiocytes of the desired stage were dissected from the staged buds. They were then macerated using a brass rod on a No. 1.5H coverslip (Marienfeld) in 10 µl digestion medium (0.4% cytohelicase, 1.5% sucrose, 1% polyvinylpyrolidone in sterile water) for 1 minute. Coverslips were then incubated in a moist chamber at 37 °C for 4 minutes before adding 10 µl of 2% lipsol solution followed by 20 µl 4% paraformaldehyde (pH 8). Coverslips were dried in the fumehood for 3 hours, blocked in 0.3% bovine serum albumin in 1X phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution and then incubated with primary antibody at 4 °C overnight and secondary antibody at 37 °C for 2 hours. In between antibody incubations, coverslips were washed 3 times for 5 minutes in 1X PBS plus 0.1% Triton X-100. Coverslips were then incubated in 10 µl DAPI (10 µg/ml) for 5 minutes , washed and mounted on a slide in 7 µl Vectashield. The following primary antibodies were used at 1:500 dilutions: anti-HEI10 (rabbit), anti-ZYP1 (rat) and anti-ASY1 (guinea-pig). The following secondary antibodies were used at 1:200 dilutions: anti-rat Alexa Fluor 488, anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 555 and anti-guinea pig Alexa Fluor 647.	Immunostained cells were imaged using 3D structured illumination microscopy (3D-SIM) on a Zeiss Elyra PS1 microscope equipped with an EM-CCD camera, a Plan-Apochromat 63x, NA 1.40 oil objective and 405, 488, 561 and 642 nm solid state laser diodes. Slides were imaged in 3D SIM mode with three stripe angles and five phases according to the microscope manufacturer’s instructions. Z-stacks were captured at an interval size of 0.0909 um, with the size of each stack being sufficiently large for the cell to be out of focus at both ends. An immersion oil with a refractive index of 1.515 was used that was optimised for the green/red (ZYP1/HEI10) channels of our system. To determine the best refractive index, 200 nm TetraSpeck microspheres (Invitrogen) were dried on a coverslip at 1/100 dilution, mounted on a slide in 7ul Vectashield, imaged using the same microscope settings as used for the experiments and then the symmetry of the point spread function for each channel was assessed in orthogonal sections through the stack. Channel alignment was performed using the same Tetraspeck beads and the ‘affine’ alignment algorithm that is included in the Zeiss Elyra software. Occasional post-processing mismatches in z-alignment were manually adjusted in some cells by trimming the top or bottom stacks to ensure maximal co-localisation of ZYP1 and HEI10 signals to facilitate downstream image analysis. For optimal image quality and to minimise the introduction of reconstruction artefacts, microscope laser power and camera gain values were adjusted for the red (HEI10) and green (ZYP1) channels within a range of 10-30% and 1-3 units, respectively, for each cell to improve contrast and reduce fluorophore bleaching. Bleaching and contrast of raw images was assessed using the SIMcheck plugin to FIJI.	Each 3D-SIM image contained one nucleus (in a small number of cases multiple nuclei were present, which did not affect the analysis). The image analysis pipeline contained six main steps: bivalent skeleton tracing, trace fluorescence intensity quantification, HEI10 peak detection, HEI10 foci identification, HEI10 foci intensity quantification, and total bivalent intensity quantification. Note that the normalization steps used for foci identification differ from those used for foci intensity quantification; the former was intended to robustly identify foci from noisy traces, whilst the latter was used to carefully quantify foci HEI10 levels.1. For bivalent skeleton tracing, individually synapsed pachytene-bivalents were traced and segmented in 3-dimensions from 3D-SIM z-stack images using the Simple Neurite Tracer (SNT) plugin to ImageJ. Traces were made using the linear ZYP1 signal, which localises along the SC. 3D-skeletons of each pachytene-bivalent path were generated using SNT. Further analysis was performed using custom Python scripts. [https://github.com/jfozard/HEI10]. Starting from an arbitrary bivalent end, skeleton voxels were ordered. Occasionally, the accidental introduction of branched segments during the initial SNT tracing step led to the premature truncation of skeleton-traces during the voxel-ordering step and, hence, these traces were excluded from the final analysis. 2. HEI10 intensities on the path were extracted using the mean intensity from a spherical region of radius 0.2 µm centred at each voxel. 3. HEI10 intensity trace data (at each point using the average over the spherical region of radius 0.2 µm) was normalized by subtraction of the mean and division by the standard deviation of the HEI10 intensities along the trace. (Note that subtraction of the median, as used in step 4 below, leads to almost identical results.) Peaks in the above HEI10 trace intensities were identified using the scipy find_peaks criterion. This criterion identifies local maxima, rejecting peaks whose prominence was less than half of the standard deviation of the HEI10 trace intensity values along the trace, or within 5 voxels (along the traced skeleton) of a more intense maximum.  Occasionally, small flecks of HEI10 foci from separate, nearby bivalents (intruding foci) were identified within the 0.2 µm spherical regions. These intruding foci usually cause a small peak on the bivalent trace that they intrude upon, but a larger peak on the correct bivalent trace. To eliminate the impact of intruding foci during peak identification we compared absolute trace peak intensities with those on all bivalents within a spheroidal region (10 voxels in each dimension, with the image resolution being 0.04 µm x 0.04 µm x 0.9 µm), rejecting peaks where a larger peak was present within this region. 4. For foci identification, the same intensity normalization was used as in step 3. Peaks were then identified as foci if their normalized intensity was more than 0.4 times the intensity of the largest peak. 5. For late-HEI10 focus intensity quantification, the median HEI10 intensity along each trace was used as an estimate of background fluorescence and subtracted from the intensities at each focus peak. Due to differences in factors such as antibody penetration and local slide conditions, we found that absolute fluorescent intensity values for the same primary and secondary antibody combinations varied considerably between cells, including between cells on the same slide. Therefore, intensities were normalized relative to the sum of all foci intensities within the same cell, in order to minimize the effects of differences in imaging conditions between cells. 6. To quantify the total HEI10 intensity per bivalent (e.g. for cells earlier in pachytene, where HEI10 foci are difficult to identify ), the median HEI10 intensity (same value as in step 5) was subtracted from each trace, and then the resulting value integrated along each bivalent trace. Similar to focus intensity quantification (step 5), these intensities were then normalized through division by the sum of the integrated intensities from all bivalents in the same cell.The same procedure as in step 2 was used to extract DAPI intensity values along each bivalent. Centromeric locations on the shortest two chromosomes were determined by applying a spatial smoothing filter (Savitzky-Golay filter of window length 101 and polynomial order 3) to these DAPI intensity traces, and finding the position of the maximum of this smoothed data. Further processing of peak intensity and position data was performed using Python packages numpy, pandas, statsmodels and matplotlib. For the analysis of per bivalent total HEI10 intensities, wild type cells of the appropriate stage (“early”, “mid” or “late”) were included in the analysis. Cells that could not be clearly staged were excluded from the analysis. Relative SC lengths were calculated by dividing each SC length by the total length of the SCs in the cell. SC relative HEI10 intensities were calculated as in step 6 above. For the central two panels of Fig 1b, analysis was restricted to all “late” cells for which all bivalents had been successfully traced (as assessed by a domain expert). Foci HEI10 intensities were calculated as in step 5 above and summed over all foci on each SC. Linear regression was performed using the Python “statsmodels” package. Kruskal-Wallis and Dunn’s tests to compare the distributions of intensities of foci for SCs with different numbers of foci were performed using the R commands “kruskal.test” and “dunn.test”. For crossover patterning analysis, all SCs which were staged as “late” and which were categorized by an expert as being good quality traces were included in the analysis. For the histograms of foci positions, these positions were rescaled to the unit interval by division by the length of the SC, and histograms generated with 10 equally sized bins. For plots of double CO HEI10 focus intensity against position, intensities (from step 5 above) were normalized by the sum of the two foci on the SC. For plots of CO HEI10 foci intensities, focus intensities were normalized against the sum of all focus intensities in the same cell.											# Phenotypes	
				Phenotype Name	cellular protein localization	
			Phenotype Description	Late-HEI10 foci localization and intensity measurements along late-pachytene bivalents are consistent with a diffusion mediated coarsening model for meiotic crossover patterning	
			Phenotype Score Type	automatic	
			Phenotype Term Source REF	CMPO	
			Phenotype Term Name	cellular protein localization	 
			Phenotype Term Accession	GO_0034613														# Feature Level Data Files (give individual file details unless there is one file per well)		
			Feature Level Data File Name	
				Feature Level Data File Format		
			Feature Level Data File Description	
				Feature Level Data Column Name	
				Feature Level Data Column Description	
									#  Processed Data Files 
					Processed Data File Name	idr0107-experimentA-processed	
			Processed Data File Format	tab-delimited text	
			Processed Data File Description	This file contains information summarizing the synaptonemal complex lengths (in microns) of each pachytene bivalent in every cell, the pachytene substage (early-, mid-, late-) of each cell and the quality of each bivalent 3D-skeleton trace file for downstream image analysis. 
				Processed Data Column Name	Image File	Comment [Bivalent path]	Bivalent length in microns	Pachytene stage	Good trace? (y/n)
Processed Data Column Type	experimental condition	location	data	phenotype	data
Processed Data Column Annotation Level	image	image	image
Processed Data Column Description	This value represents the measured length of the individual pachytene bivalent in microns. This value was obtained using the Simple-Neurite Tracer plugin to FIJI. 	"This phenotype denotes the pachytene sub-stage (-early, -mid, -late) that was defined by the experimenter for the individual cell. "	This defines the quality of the trace and suitability for downstream data analysis. Complete traces are marked 'y' and truncated traces are marked 'n' and are unsuitable for downstream analysis. 
Processed Data Column Link To Assay File	Image File (note some images contain multiple cells, denoted by the presence of a single decimal point at the end of the processed Image File name)		